I wanted to take just
a moment to talk to
you about one of my
favorite conferences, angle brackets. It's
in Las Vegas this year,
November 10th, through the 13th, we've
got some amazing speakers. We've
got Scott Guthrie, Michelle Bustamante, Kathleen
dollar Douglas Crockford is joining
us again. This fall, Julie
Lurman, Elijah Manor, and many,
many more. It's also a
nice conference because it is
co located with dev intersections,
which means that if you
register for ankle brackets, that
angle brackets.org, you can go
back and forth seamlessly to
sessions with endeavor intersection. So
you get to go to
both conferences. If you register
by October 20th, you get the
early bird bonus. And if
you get the show package,
you'll get your choice of
a surface, a Dell venue,
pro eight or an Xbox
one. Lots of great reasons
to check out angle brackets.
We'll have lots of keynotes.
We'll have meetups and open
spaces, lots and lots of
sessions. You might even want
to check out a pre-conference
or post-conference workshop. Bring the
family, hang out by the
pool at the MGM grand.
We're going to have a
lot of fun. We're going
to talk about the open
web there'll be conference sessions
on angular JS on breeze
on jQuery on the next
version of asp.net. Lots of
open source, lots of fun
stuff. It's an angle brackets.org,
November 10th through the 13th. Now
is the time tell your
boss you want to go
to angle brackets.  from
hanselminutes.com. It's Hansel minutes, a
weekly discussion with web developer
and technologists. Scott Hanselman. This
is Lawrence Ryan announcing show number
four 45. In this episode,
Scott talks with bow head
about CSS animation. Hi, this
is Scott Hanselman. This is
another episode of Hansel minutes,
and I'm here at the
blend conference in Charlotte, North Carolina.
And I'm talking with Val
head. How are you? Good.
How are you doing Scott?
Fantastic. Fantastic. Having lots of
fun here at the conference.
Yeah, it's been a great
first day in event. It's
been fun. So you're a
user experience, expert or designer.
Do you CSS, you do
all of these kind of
things. What are you talking
about at blend? Well, I'm
talking tomorrow near the end
of the day, and I'm
talking about a UI animation
for the web. So animating
our interfaces that we design
and develop for our websites
and how we can do
that using web standards, which
is kind of basically my
favorite thing ever. It seems
like there was a time
when, anytime we can animate
something, we will try to
do it. So like, it
seems like flash was like
invented just so we could
fly things around the page.
And as soon as we
learned that we could, we
abused it. Yes. Yeah. Flash
sort of has a bad
rap for that. Right. You
know, all the flash intros
and everything, but, and I
mean, some, most, yeah, most
of those were completely terrible
and awful, but I think
in one, on one side
of it, we were trying
to do something. And then
when we made those intros,
you know, we were looking
for a creative way to,
you know, convey our message,
convey what the site was
about, what that company was
about to people visiting, perhaps
not the best choice in
hindsight, maybe a terrible choice.
But, you know, I think,
I think we learned a
lot from that, both in
the fact that like motion
is an expressive way to
convey design and you know
what, you're all about intros.
Maybe not really the way
to do it though. They're
kind of coming back Really.
Yeah. The big, like JavaScript
loading in trouble, Not quite
as bad. We've, we've definitely
learned some lessons. There's not
the big loading, like how,
and up to a hundred,
that takes five years. But
a lot of these, a
lot of like iOS apps
or, you know, just general
mobile apps who are their
sites basically are just to
promote their app. Right. So
they'll have a lot of
sites that really, what they're
trying to do is tell
the story of why their
product exists and what they're
creating are essentially like intros,
but better because they have
a lot of motion. They're
kind of telling this more
or less linear story of
like, here's my app. Here's
why you might want it
go download it. And I
think that's really interesting. It's
like intros 2.0, but like
actually using, It seems like
a lot of the, the
first time you've ever been
here or first time you've
run type controls. Are those,
those kind of interests, I
guess this is an iOS
app. Look how friendly I
am. Here's an arrow. Welcome.
You want to push here?
You want to do that
in case you weren't familiar
with the hamburger icon. That's
what this is. Yeah. There's
a lot of those too.
I mean, that's a whole
other use for it as
well as these kind of
instructional type things. And I
know I did a lot
of flash back in the
day and that was probably,
I did a ton of
those, of like how to
use this software and we're
kind of still doing it.
You know, we, I'm sure
some people would say, if
you need to do that,
there's a problem with your
UX. I don't know if
that's really a hard, fast
black and white rule, but
you know, it's, it's, there's
still tons of use for
these things like intros and
these kind of walkthroughs that
we ripped on flash for.
But it's like, you know
what? They weren't all bad.
We just need to pick
the good stuff. I remember
reading somewhere that motion and
quick cuts in children's cartoons.
Like the idea of like
camera one, camera, two camera,
two camera. One was that
the, when things happen in
the periphery of our vision,
it fires a certain part
of our brain that basically
says there could be a
predator. No, I think that's
true. I mean, I don't
know if I'm, I can't,
I can't think of the
exact studies, but I know
I've read stuff like that
too. And it's kind of
also why, you know, it's,
it's why those stupid banner
ads for like mortgages have
like the dancing dude or
why car dealerships how'd that
guy. Exactly. So it's like
motion is so powerful and
we've mostly used it for
evil on the web, if
you mean banner ad evil.
I don't know if that
counts as true evil, they're
generally pretty evil. So I
kind of like to convince
people, or, you know, just
tell people in my talks
about how we can use
that harness, that power for
good. And we can make
things that are really useful
and helpful and it doesn't
just have to banner ads
and intros and it just
really shouldn't be there. Actually,
There was a time when
post flash pre kind of
HTML five or pre-modern web
when jQuery was how people
did this, they would make
these tight loops and they
would animate CSS properties. And
then I'm hearing more and
more that that can cause
battery drain and power issues.
Then we now have CSS
animations. Is that the kind
of animations people should primarily
be looking at? Yeah, definitely.
I mean, it's, it's, it's,
it's a bit of a
confusing time. Cause like, you
know, like you said, we
had flash and that was
your only option for adding
animation. And then I got,
went away and like jQuery
was our only option for
animation. And now it's like,
you could use Java script,
you could use CSS, you
could use SVG. It's like,
there's so many things. And
then you can also animate
SVG with CSS or with
JavaScript. And then there's the
whole like canvas web GL
situation. So it's kind of
extremely overwhelming. It's extremely over.
And I'd like to understand,
like for what class of
animation you use, what technology,
and if I pick one
of these technologies, what if
I pick the wrong one?
Yeah. I think, I think
the good news is it's
pretty hard to pick the
wrong one entirely. And, and
also it's really hard. There's
not like one that's always
better. I mean, a lot
of the marketing stuff, especially
for some of these kind
of third party engines and
libraries are all like ours
is the best. It's faster
than CSS. And you're like,
but I mean, that kind
of doesn't matter, you know,
that's, it's just, we're always
using things like JavaScript and
CSS and HTML together on
the web. Cause that's how
the web is built and
you know, one being better
than the other isn't really
ever true. Cause no matter
what, you know, if you
make really poor decisions with
whatever tool you're using, you
can make it bad. Or
if you make really good
decisions, whatever tool you're using,
you can make it good.
So I don't know. I
like, I like to think
it's more about the person
making it. Well, I try
not to make my decisions
based on like micro benchmarks.
Like I can do this
a million times in a
loop way better than library
B. Yeah. But you're like
how many times are you
going to be doing a
million things? But part of
the reason why jQuery specifically
has kind of fallen out
of favor for that is
basically now browsers have gotten
a lot faster, like JavaScript
in general and this whole
request animation frame thing, which
jQuery animate doesn't use. So
it's kind of like, that's
part of the reason why
the battery drain and everything
happens. It's like, what is
that request? Animation frame it's
space. It's a little complicated,
but basically it's the browser
kind of keeping track of
a frame rate of when
things are updating and based
on, you know, various factors
of essentially how fast it
can update things and repaint
what needs to be repainted
or redraw paint might be
the wrong word there, but
whatever. And so if you
have something like jQuery animate,
that's just like trying to
do stuff a million times
a second, but maybe the
request animation frame can't stay.
Keep up to that rate.
You may be changing things
multiple times, like 50 times
and only be able to
see an update once. And
then you're doing all this
extra work and nobody can
see it. So let me
see if I can understand
that. So when I play
video games, some people say
you need to run at
a hundred frames a second,
but you know, it's going
to cause visual tearing. It's
not going to look right.
And it also is unnecessary
work. So I usually press
the it's called via line
sync. And it says, go
at the same speed that
my monitor can, can go.
My monitor can do 60
frames a second don't bother.
So you're saying that if
I write an animation in
a kind of a thoughtless
way, I could be trying
to animate something a thousand
times a second, but request
animation frame is going to
take 15 or 20 or
30 or whatever my computer
is capable of. Yeah. It's
really similar to that monitor
thing. It's like you can
ask the browser to change
things way faster than it
might be able to. So,
you know, when you're doing
things like actually you can
access the request, animation frame
information through JavaScript. I'm apparently
a lot of CSS animations
like internally in the browsers
are actually using that same
request, animation frame, I guess
engine, you might call it.
You can't reference it in
any way through CSS, but
many browsers take the CSS
animations. And while they are,
you know, interpreting or basically
displaying your animation, they're using
that same internal mechanism. So
that's part of the reason
why CSS animations can also
be. So, you know, I'm
really efficient when it comes
to battery usage, all that
kind of stuff, right? The
browser do what the browser
is good at. Don't overthink
it. But it's like, and
I like to say that
the best thing about CSS
animations is it's all handled
in the browser. But the
worst thing about CSS animations
is that it's all handled
in the browser because you
know, you're handing that off.
You don't have that control.
The browser's taking care of
it. Sometimes it doesn't do
what you want to do.
And it's still completely possible
to create CSS animations that
will kill your battery. Like
there's no complete fail safe
way. If you try hard
enough, you can totally break
anything. I sometimes feel like
programmers who came from the
backend like myself, think procedurally,
I can write ifs and
fours and everything is from
top to bottom while designers
are more kind of big
picture and declarative CSS is
declarative and HTML is declarative.
So there's this mountain that
we're trying to drill a
hole through. I'm on one
side doing it. The procedural
way designers are trying to
do it. The declarative way.
CSS animation seemed like a
little of both. Like when
I run an animation though,
I want to write it
in code CSS is very
declarative, but CSS animations can
let you two key frames
and things. It's, it's still
a very declarative though. I
mean, when you're dealing with
CSS, animations and key frames
specifically, I mean, you write
out those key frames and
that key frame list is
there and you can be
like, Hey, assign the, this
list of key frames I
made. And key frames is
just like a list of
what you want to have
happen. Okay. Moment in time.
Right? Like at this point
it should look like that.
You may have a list
of three things you want
to have happen. You're like
the animation should do these
three things in this order.
And those are my key
frames. And you can take
those key frames and apply
them to, you know, any
element on your page. That's
animatable, which is just about
anything these days, but you
can't change those key frames.
So they are, they are
declarative still. It's like, you're
like, here's, what's gonna happen.
You can assign it to
whatever you want. But those
that list you created is
never going to change. Yeah.
And you know, that's good
and that's bad sometimes that,
you know, sometimes that's perfect.
You're like, awesome. And that's
part of you, you can
rate this list of what
you want to have happen.
You're like, that's always what
I want to have happen.
But if you're in a
situation and you're like, well,
sometimes I want to do
this. And sometimes I want
to do that. Like then
CSS isn't maybe. So well-equipped,
you know, that's, that's where
the less declarative and more,
I'm not sure what the
opposite of declarative is. Yeah.
Or more flexible, more programmed
type thing. So that means
like if I'm going to
do really a data driven
animation, I might use SVG
and D three JS. Yeah.
And the kind of idea,
you know, with things like
JavaScript, you can create these,
I guess you might even
call them more like physic
physics based animations where like
here's your gravity and your
drag. And you know, it
kind of adapts more that
way, where CSS are just
like, here is your motion
and both, you know, both
are usable with when you're
in, when it comes to
animating UIs or creating any
animation, it's just two different
approaches. And there's many, there's
a big, huge gray area
where either one could go
and then there's kind of
outliers where you should probably
stick to one or the
other, Something I'm going to
want to use a tool
for like, like something that's
like an almost a mini
movie editor that's going to
then generate some crazy CSS.
Or do I write this
in a text editor? Unfortunately,
there isn't anything. There isn't
a good visual editor yet.
And that actually really annoys
me because I don't think
it should be, especially for,
you know, something where you're
writing declarative key frames and
making this list ahead of
time. Why should it be
a requirement that you have
to do that in code?
Like why can't someone who
thinks more visually, you know,
visually have a timeline in
front? No, the only editor
I've seen, that's even closer
to that. Isn't technically a
CSS editor. It's Google's editor
that you use to make
banner ads. Oh yeah. What,
what do they call that
web designers? It's cut some
strange name, The name that
makes you feel like it
cares about you Google web
designer, and then you download
it and it's like, make
banner ads. I'm like, Oh,
this is a thing to
make flashy Geico ads. Yeah.
That's not what I wanted.
There's a couple almost tools
there's that Adobe has edge
animate, which is also timeline
based. Interestingly, it just spits
out a bunch of Dwayne
jQuery animation. So it's still
browser based, but it doesn't
give you CSS animation right
now. It may in the
future, I kind of hope
it does. Apparently Mozilla is
working on an in-browser CSS,
animation editor of some kind.
Isn't not the way though.
It's all going to be
in browser. Even things like
some of the edge tools
are just, you know, the,
the browser in a frame.
And I guess Mozilla has
some kind of web audio
editing tool already. So I'm
interested to see what their
animation one looks like. Cause
that's a huge, that's a
huge gap in the tools
we have to create CSS
based animation right now is
like you got code it.
And I think that's kind
of unfair. Like why should
you have to? So the
kinds of things that I
might want to do are
really, you know, move things
around, make things, poles or
glow, but then also more
sophisticated, like maybe even a
character or a basic character
animation, how complicated can it
get? It can get pretty.
It kind Of, I feel
like the CSS animations are
the biggest limit is your
patients to write key frames
really? Because you can essentially,
you know, you, you can
go from zero to a
hundred percent and you can
have decimals. So you're effectively
can have nearly, I don't
know, basically infinite number of
key frames. There probably is
a limit, but I'm sure
you'd get tired of writing
them before you hit that.
So it can get pretty
complex and you can do
a lot of complex transforms
with 'em with CSS transforms.
It's it's actually pretty impressive.
It's it's really more your
patients to write it out
since you do have to
do it by hand and
it is declarative. So if
you want to edit things,
that can be kinda messy
too. So that's kind of
the big thing that's missing
is like a really handy
editor for changing this stuff
without driving yourself crazy. So
let me, let me see,
even though we're on a
podcast and people can't hear
us, they can go to
your website and they can
look at your screencast. If
you've got screencasts on how
to do this, of course
it is funny to be
doing animation, but let's try
kind of two thought experiments.
So if I have a
button on my page and
someone shows up on the
page and let's say that
they're shitting around for 10
seconds and they haven't moved
yet. And they're like, they
haven't made their decision. So
I'm detecting the users, not
made the decision and I
want to make the button
kind of pulse, like get
larger and get smaller. How
would I even start doing
that in CSS animation? Well,
you probably want to oversize
should mention my screencast is
called all the right moves
and it is listed on
my site. It's a, it's
a dorky Tom cruise movie
reference. It's really funny. Have
you heard of it? Okay.
Most people haven't. I will
put that in the show
notes as well as a
link to the Tom cruise
scenes. But to do that,
you would definitely need two
things because you want to
detect that your user has
been inactive. So you'd probably
do that with JavaScript, somehow
tracking your most movement or
lack thereof, some kind of
timer or whatever. And then
you could do the animation
itself by writing some key
frames in CSS to do,
you know, transform like scale,
scale up and down. However
you want to do that.
Maybe a little bit of
a, you know, translation as
well. However, however crazy. Yeah,
because I guess I could,
I could have it wiggle
or get bigger. So like
X, Y scale, You have
that depth, like you can
do 3d transforms really easily
in CSS. It's actually the
easiest 3d ever it's like
rotate something on the yeah.
Seriously done. So then the
key frame, like would one
key frame be it in
its normal state? Yeah. I
like to start. There's kind
of a debate about that
as to whether you should
actually have a first key
frame at its initial state.
I think you should, because
it makes for me in
the way I think about
stuff and makes things a
lot easier. Some people are
like, Oh my God, you
wrote an extra line of
code. The world is going
to end. So, you know,
if you're the, on that,
if you're on that, Well,
I want to return to
that state. I want to
reference that state. It makes
sense to have it be
a state Having it there.
So you can have a
first key frame, could be
your existing state. And then
you might have, you know,
maybe like 30% or something,
you make it bigger, you
know, scale it up to
one 50 year. Maybe probably
like one 20 or something.
One 50 is a pretty
big increase. And then maybe
like 60% you go down
to like one 10. So
it's not just a straight,
linear back and forth, you
know, key frames. You can
kind of have these little
stages in and out, like
make a pulse a little
bit bigger, a little smaller,
and then, you know, have
it go back at the
end to its original state.
That's how I would do
it. I like having the
beginning and end state there
in my key frames. Cause
I I'm terrible at remembering
what I wrote. Like 10
lines up W quick kind
of sideways sidebar. You brought
up something that I think
that you would find intuitive,
but I don't think everyone
who's listening would, which is
the, your as a, as
a non-designer person, my first
reaction is like, make it
bigger, make it smaller. And
it would end up looking
like this, like 1980s Wolf
and Stein where it just
goes, but there's like easing
in and easing out. Can
you talk about that a
little bit and how that
affects why it looks right
to us more than Well,
there's a, there's lots of
easing is basically kind of
like the key to making
animations look good for better,
for worse. The default easing
and CSS is ease, which
actually starts out slow as
fast as in the middle
and end slow. And that's
kind of like the there's
the, if you've ever heard
of the Disney principles of
animation and the illusion of
life, one of their main
principles is like start slow
in and slow out. Basically
the idea of in real
life, nothing starts moving at
full speed and it stops
at full speed. Everyone needs
to like speed up, hit
their full speed. And then
when they're going to stop,
they generally slow down. So
by using that kind of,
you know, ease, ease, and
he's out situation where you
start slow fastest in the
middle, that feels much more
natural. And of course there
like 500 different ways to
do ease and ease out
because we have the keywords
of like ease the keyword
of ease and ease out.
And then CSS also has
cubic Bezier curves where you
can essentially define nearly any
type of motion curve you
want. As long as it
only has two control points,
but there's still a lot
of options. So you can
adjust how fast you speed
up, how quickly you reach
your top speed and how
quickly you drop off to
slow down. So, and that's
kind of like the whole
personality or the, yeah. And
as those curves just described
as like a series of
numbers, like this kind of
thing. Yeah. It's four numbers.
You can the easiest way
to look at them as,
as motion graphs. And there's
a site called cubic bezier.com
that gives you the numbers
and the graph that you
can play with. There's also
Cesar, which is a fun
tool. I like it. That
it's a pun cause it's
like CSS, easing Caesar. Oh,
that's great. So there's a
few tools out there to
give you that visual connection,
because essentially the four numbers
reference the position of the
two control points of your
curve. But normal humans don't
generally think like that. I
like to see the curve.
Do you think seals and
basically wherever the graph or
the other curve is steepest,
you're going faster and wherever
it's flattest, you're going slower
and you have, you know,
a lot of competition. So
I'm trying to visualize that,
like I might want to
really start slow really, really
keeping it kind of ease
up, but then I want
you to end really quickly.
So that's like a gradual
start at plateau and then
a dropoff. I can describe
that curve in a bit.
Yeah. I would actually just
be kind of like a
ramp up and then straight
across the top because flat
is like, it's still going
in time, but the speed
has been slowed down. So
yeah, there's so many it's,
it's, there's so options you
can create for yourself there.
So the button's one example,
but that's a basic example
of one element. Let's say,
I want to make a
little person, he's got a
head, he's got a torso
and he's got two legs.
So it's circle rectangle, rectangle,
rectangle. Do I name those
elements and group them in
some way? Do I make
them SVG? Do I like
have like the head div
and the torso div and
then, but now I'm starting
to get like, is CSS
and HTML meant to be
used in this way? Cause
you see people making like
Mario entirely in CSS. It's
like, well, should you be
doing that? How would I
make that little man walk?
Well kind of how you
described, like you'd want to
have them in pieces essentially
very similar to how you
would, if you were going
to animate him and after
effects or something as well,
you know, you'd need, he
need to have separate limbs
or you're not gonna be
able to make them move.
And I actually have a
little example I use in
my workshop, I call Bob
the robot where we do
essentially that it's a fun,
it's a fun way to,
to, to play around with
key frames. You know, you're
making, you're making a robot
move who wouldn't want to
do that. And so we
have his, like his head,
his robot body, his arms
and his legs are all
separate things. We position them
all with CSS and then
create separate animations for essentially
each of his limbs and
his head. And he can,
So he's not, he doesn't,
he and the code don't
know he's attached. Like it
looks like he's walking only
because the key frames that
move his leg are ending
up in the same location
that is torso. But ultimately
they're not attached. They don't
know that there are no
vertices or No, there's nothing.
There's nothing like that. I
mean, usually it's probably going
to save you a lot
of time. If you stick
him in like a containing
div, in some ways you
can move the entire robot
as well. But yeah, you
know, your, your, your, your
HTML document doesn't know his
leg from a paragraph essentially.
So I guess that's kind
of weird, but you know,
everything is just an object
and you're just manipulating it
with these styles and, you
know, essentially marking up and
then styling it with CSS.
Just you're actually having this
time dimension in motion as
well In your talk that
you give on this, you
do talk. So there's also
workshops. And of course your
screencasts, what are some like
some dues and do nots?
What are some like, you
can do this, never do
this in CSS animation At
my do's. And don'ts are
usually more about making like
useful animation and animation. That's
like good quality and the
stuff people would want to
see in that you'd want
to make. Cause I feel
like, you know, just like
type and color and all
these things, animation is an
aspect of design we can
use to differentiate our products
and, and convey our message.
And if we use it
well, people, you know, it's
like, that's what makes something
that might've been okay to
be like amazing is when
you make these good decisions.
So I like to talk
about the do's and don'ts
so just things like, he
would always make sure you're
responding to the user in
a way that feels right.
You know, like create lots
of prototypes and see what's
happening. Like for your button
example, you know, create that
really fast and something like
code pen or a JSPM
whatever, and try it out.
Like when you, when you
aren't, you know, click on
it or when you're not
active for awhile, does it
feel like it's responding to
you when you click on
it? Does it feel like
it's actually, you know, doing
what you want or, or
being aware of your interaction?
And then secondly, is it
doing it in a way
that conveys the message you
sort of want, you know,
we were talking about the
slow and out. If it's
going really, really fast and
you are like, I don't
know, like a site about
meditation and yoga, maybe that
doesn't fit so well Information
because it is a stressing
the personnel, but it seems
like restraint then is a
really important aspect to animation.
It is. I mean, it's
kind of like really good
design is the design that's
most amazing. You kind of
don't notice, I think animation
is sort of similar, but
it's very hard not to
notice because you were talking
about how we just don't
as these things in the
frightened flight sort of aspect,
but yeah. And that's where
prototyping really comes in handy
as well as like, you
want to find these interactions
and these times and whatever
this interface you're creating is
where, you know, maybe you
do need some extra information,
you know, to call attention
to something, to kind of
give the spatial awareness of
where things are. You know,
we use a lot of,
you know, kind of hiding
layers of sites and apps
behind other things, motions and
great way to indicate where
that stuff came from and
went to you, look for
those places where some additional
information would be helpful and
then basically your prototype, the
crap out of it to
make sure what you're building
feels right and is conveying
information. And that's kinda the
key to it. I mean,
it's like wrapping up a
very complex thing to simple
rule, but you know, do
that as much as possible
and practice it and you'll
get better at it. And
you'll start making awesome animations
At the beginning of our
conversation. You, you said that
some people think that like
if you have to point
to something or make it
wiggle, then maybe you're doing
it wrong. I saw a
gentleman give a presentation and
he was talking about the
hamburger, which is the three
horizontal lines that all developers
designers and programmer types understand.
But none of our nontechnical
relatives have any idea what
it means. And he was
talking about some testing where
you put this hamburger grippy
thing and you know, X
percentage of people click it
and then you just change
the word to menu. And
then everyone starts to click
it. But it seems like
we really don't want to
just have the word menu.
We want to have something
visually interesting. So people will
make arrows. That will point
thing like your first run,
look at that. You really
want to click that. Or
I, you know, iOS apps
will dim out the screen
and force you to click
on it. So they've proven
you've done it at least
once. So some developers and
designers think that that's a
crutch. Would you say that
those are examples where animation,
you know, easing between two
transitions is a way of
leading the person kind of
down the Primrose path? Possibly.
Yeah. I mean, if you
have an interaction that's a
little different and I've also
seen that a lot of
iOS apps, I kind of
have almost this little intro
to it that show you
with like little dots of
like where to swipe and
you know how to swipe,
even though that's like common,
even though that's a really
common mobile, like, you know,
handheld screen interaction. So I
think some help is good.
I mean the hamburger icon
one is an interesting argument
because it's kind of like
on one hand, you're like,
well, did anyone know what
the save icon meant? When
we first had it? People
have learned no disagree. It
was a picture of a
DOE. True. It was a
picture of a desk, but
there's definitely like, we w
we can learn what these
abstract things mean over time.
And maybe the hamburger icon
isn't going to last over
time. I don't know. But
it's like, it's pretty new.
We've been doing it maybe
a few years. So, Well,
like I showed my wife
how in the Facebook app,
you can swipe in the
middle of the Facebook app
site. And it opens this
like drawer. She freaked out
because she didn't know, she
had no idea it was
there. And I'm like, for
every one of me, there's
a Amelia, Amelia like a
hundred people who have never
seen that before. Like when
you show people like double
tapping on our phone, like,
But I think where that,
where it's tricky is like,
stuff like that. That's like
extra information. It's fine. If
you don't see it, but
things like your main menu.
I think that's why the
hamburger icon is so hotly
debated in a way, cause
it's this strange icon we've
introduced that doesn't make sense
to a lot of people.
And it's how we get
to our main navigation, which
is generally a place people
are trying to go and,
you know, really adding the
word menu next to it.
I don't, I mean, that
seems like a pretty good
compromise sometimes. I wonder why
we debate it so much.
One animation I saw that
was really cool to introduce
this idea of here's a
hamburger menu and there's something
behind it. Wasn't wiggling the
menu and it wasn't pointing
an arrow to it. It
was just when you were
at an idle state, it
was just gently pulling out,
peeking behind giving you a
little hint, just kind of
going, Hey, look over here.
And then the person's like,
what's right. And then they
want to kind of pull
it in that's feels like
a good animation to me,
it's a little more subtle.
And so there's definitely things
where, you know, that's probably
way more effective than having
a weird flashing era of
just like, here's sort of
how it works. And just
a little hint at where
things are and where things
come from like that. And
I think it feel like
that's the kind of stuff
you get by trying things
out. Like maybe whoever came
up with that tried on
arrow and was like, this
is obnoxious, like tried flashing
stuff. And we're like, Oh,
that's a still of noxious.
Oh, what if I do
this? And I think that's
how you discover these really
great interactions When you find
a really good interaction or
a really good animation. I
know you probably had the
experience where it's like, Oh,
they thought about that. Exactly.
I remember the first time
that I had a list
with a little grippy and
I grabbed an item to
rearrange it in the list
in the other list, items
like run out of the
way, like getting out of
my way. I'm like someone
it's, this feels crafted it's
I think a really good
innovation is that moment where
it's like, they could have
just went like snap snap.
Like, remember when you would
have a sorting a manual
list, that'd be an arrow
up and an arrow down.
Yeah. They're just kind of
jumping in. You weren't even
sure. Which one moved totally
weak sauce. Yeah. No, it's,
it's it definitely takes a
lot of thought and planning
to do it well, but
I mean, that's kind of
all designed, right. You know,
it's like, if you're going
to do it well, you
have to think things through
and try things out. And
that's how you'll get to
the really great combination that
works for what you need
to say. You mentioned code
pen, where are some other
sites that people who maybe
aren't designers that are kind
of wishing that they were,
or they want to be
a developer designer can start
exploring other people's animations. And
the work that they're doing
is a really one, it
has a really, They probably
have the best kind of
like exploring feature that I've
seen at least visually be
able to explore stuff with
little thumbnails JS. Ben has
a lot of great stuff
too. And those are kind
of the main two that
I use as far as
like, just seeing other people's
little experience. And these are
galleries where you basically have
a CSS, pain, JavaScript pain,
and an HTML, and you
just sign up and you
can start writing your code
there and then immediately share
it. Yeah. Yeah. It's really,
it's really handy that way.
I think I know I
use it a lot for
like workshops and stuff too,
cause I, no one has
to like have text editors
installed there. It doesn't even
matter what they have installed.
You just like go to
code pen, get an account.
We're all dealing with The
same stuff. Right. No install
on it. So it's, it's
pretty handy. It's fun to
just like pop in there
and try something out. And
if it sucks, just delete
it. But one has to
know, and if you like
it, Do you keep a
library of animations or like
of interactions or are you
always writing them completely from
scratch? Like, do you have
your own stash? I kind
of do it on a
per project basis. Cause I
feel like, you know, the,
the, you know, when we
were talking about the easing
and the, the personality of
the animation, I feel like
you want to keep a
lot of that consistent across
a project because you pick
easing that fits your message,
like the whole yoga studio,
fast flashing button thing. So
I like to do it
on a per project thing.
And there's a lot of
ones like usually like fade
and scale that I pretty
much make for everything and
just use them in different
combinations. I don't usually, if
I, if I share them
across projects, it's just like,
I start with them and
then change it all the
time. Just kind of copy
paste as a jumpstart. I
kind of feel like the,
you know, if you're going
to bother them, animate anything
at all, it should really
fit with your design and
probably doesn't apply to the
law or, you know, pulling
from the last project you
did probably isn't going to
help that much. But that's
just, When people do the,
the big picture design they
have, like, here's the visual
language of our site. Here's
the font that represents them.
Here's the buttons. And they
get all the way down.
How do you express though?
Like, here's our animation language,
because you could hand a
bunch of suits eight and
a half 11 sheets of
paper. You can paste them
up on the wall, but
how do you say here's
the active ness of our
site Generally do it in
two ways. We'll start a
lot of the time with
like, sort of like an
element closure type thing where
it's like just showing static
elements and you might share
like a mini storyboard of
like, here's how this button
might change. Just to get
people the idea, like here's
where motion might make sense.
And then once you start
doing things like a lot
of projects I've been working
on recently sort of have
a style guide or like
a pattern lab of sorts
where this living browser based
thing, show stuff like your
main colors, your main type
faces, then you can just
have, even if it's just
like little squares of like
showing here's how emotion should
happen. This is like the
easing curves we should. Right?
So like a, like a,
like almost like a bootstrap,
one pager where it's like,
here's all our buttons and
you can, you can actually
interact with it and see
those animations and decide upon
them Step below that, of
just being like, you know,
here's how things should move.
Like here's a square and
this is, you know, the
easing we want to use,
or this is maybe here's
the four different easings we
want to use and here's
how they work together or
which ones are best for
which, and you know, it's
a little, it kind of
fits in with all the
same type stuff of like
here's our tight face and
here's the 10 sizes we're
going to use. It's a
really similar, Very cool. So
where can people find you
online, get your research and
you also sell an ebook?
Yep. All of my stuff
is generally@valhead.com. That's my site.
You can find me on
Twitter at VL H and
yeah, I have a book
on CSS animation. That's published
by five simple steps. That's
linked from my site as
well, and also on five
simple steps because you know,
they do that to you
since it's they published it.
Very cool. Well, thanks so
much for chatting with us
today. This has been another
episode of Hanselminutes and we'll
see you again next week.